Now then. As we study man or any other living organism and try and describe him accurately and scien­tifically, we find that our normal sensation of ourselves as isolated egos inside a bag of skin is a hallucination. 

It really is. It’s absolutely nutty, because when you describe human behavior, or the behavior of a mouse or a rat or a chicken or anything you want to describe, you find that as you try to describe its behavior accurately, you must also describe the behavior of its environment. 

Supposing I walk and you want to describe the action of walking. You cannot talk about my walking without also describing the floor, because if you do not describe the floor and the space in which I am moving, all you will be describing is somebody swinging his legs in empty space.

So as to describe my walking, you must describe the space in which you find me. 

You know, you couldn’t see me unless you could also see my background, what stands behind me. See, if I myself, if the boundaries of my skin were coterminous with your whole field of vision you would not see me at all. You would see my bright, red vest instead. That’s why put it on this evening and to demonstrate this point. And that would be the thing that filled your field of vision, that was the thing standing there, you would not see me, because in order to see me you have to see not only what is inside the boundary of my skin, but you have to see what is outside it too.

Now, that is terribly important. Really, the funda­mental, ultimate mystery – the only thing you need to know to understand the deepest metaphysical secrets – is this: that for every outside there is an inside, and for every inside there is an outside. And although they are different, they go together. 

There is, in other words, a secret conspiracy between all insides and all outsides, and the conspiracy is this: to look as different as possible, and yet underneath to be identical. Because you don't find one without the other. Like Tweedledum and Tweedledee agreed to have a battle. 

Note that – agreed. So there is a secret: what is esoteric, what is profound, and what is deep is what we will call the “implicit.” What is obvious and in the open is what we will call the “explicit.” And I and my environment, you and your environment are explicitly as different as dif­ferent could be, but implicitly you go together. And this is discovered by the scientist, when he tries. The whole art of sciences describe what happens exactly, and when he describe exactly what you do, he finds out that you, your behavior, is not something that can be separated from the behavior of the world around you.

He realizes then that you are something that the whole world is doing. Just as when the sea has waves on it, all right, you see is the ocean is waving. And so each one of us is a waving of the whole cosmos, the entire works, all there is, and with each one of us it is waving and saying "Yoo-hoo! Here I am!" only does it differently each time, because variety is the spice of life.

But you see, the funny thing is we havn't been brought up to feel that way. Instead of feeling that we, each one of us, are something that the whole realm of being is doing, we feel that we are something that has come into the whole realm of being as a stranger. When we were born we do not really know where we came from because we do not remember, and we think when we die, that's just going to be that. Some people console themselves with the idea that they are going to Heaven, or that they are going to be reincarnated, summerland or something you know, but people don’t really believe that. For most people it is implausible, and the real thing that haunts them is that when they die they will go to sleep and are never going to wake up. They are going to be locked up in the safe deposit box of darkness forever. 

But that all depends, you see, upon a false notion of what is one’s self. Now the reason why we have this false notion of ourselves is, as far as I can understand it, that we have spe­cialized in one particular kind of consciousness. 

Being very general, rough, we have two kinds of consciousness. One I will call the spotlight, and the other the flood­light. The spotlight is what we call conscious attention and that is trained into us from childhood as the most valuable form of consciousness. When the teacher in class says "Pay attention!" everybody stares and looks right at the teacher like that. 

That is spotlight consciousness; fixing your mind on one thing at a time. Concentrate! And even though you may not be able to have a very long attention span, nevertheless you concentrate. You use your spotlight: one thing after another, one thing after another, flip, flip, flip, flip, flip, like that. 

But we also have another kind of consciousness which I call the floodlight. For example, you can drive your car for sev­eral miles with a friend sitting next to you, and your spotlight consciousness will be completely absorbed in talking to your friend. Nevertheless, your floodlight con­sciousness will manage the driving of the car, will notice all the stoplights, the other idiots on the road, and so on, and you will get there safely without even thinking about it.

But our culture has taught us to specialize in spotlight consciousness and to identify ourselves with that form of consciousness alone. "I am my spotlight consciousness, my conscious attention. That is my ego. That is me." And very largely we ignore the floodlight. 

The floodlight consciousness is working all the time. Every nerve end that we have is its instrument. 

You know, you can go out to a luncheon or something and you sit next to Mrs. So-and-So, and you go home and your wife says to you "Was Mrs. So-and-So there?" "Yes, I sat next to her." "Well what was she wearing?" "I haven’t the faintest idea." You saw, but you did not notice. 

Now, because we have been brought up to identify ourselves with the spot­light consciousness, and the floodlight consciousness is undervalued, we have the sensation of ourselves as being just the spotlight. Just the ego that looks and attends to this and that and the other. 

And so we ignore and are unaware of the vast, vast extent of our being. People who by various methods become fully aware of their floodlight consciousness, have what is called a mystical experience or a cosmic consciousness or what the Buddhists call bodhi, awak­ening. The Hindus call it moksha, liberation, because they discover that the real deep, deep self, that which you really are, fundamentally and forever, is the whole of being – all that there is, the works, that is you. Only that universal self that is you has a capacity to focus itself at ever so many different here-and-nows. 

So, when you use the word “I”, as William James said “is really a word of position like ‘this,’ or ‘here’.” Just as a sun or star has many rays, so the whole cosmos expresses itself in you and you and you, in all the different variations. It plays games: it plays the John Doe game, the Mary Smith game. It plays the beetle game, the butterfly game, the bird game, the pigeon game, the fish game, the star game. Just like these are games that differ from each other just like backgammon, whist, bridge, poker, pinochle; or like the waltz, mazurka, minuet, and so on. 

It dances with infinite variety, but every single dance that it does, that is to say – you – is what the whole thing is doing. But you see, we forget it. We don't know. We are brought up in a special way so that we are unaware of the connection. Unaware that each one of us is the works playing it this way for a while. 

And so we have been taught to dread death as if that were the end of the show. That won’t happen anymore. And therefore to be afraid of all the things that might bring about death: pain, sickness, suffering. And if you don’t know you see? If you are not really vividly aware of the fact that you are basically “the works,” you have no real joy in life, you are just a bundle of anxiety mixed up with guilt, because, you see, when we bring children into the world, we play awful games with them.

Instead of saying, “How do you do? Welcome to the human race. Now my dear, we are playing some very complicated games, and these are the rules of the game we are playing. I want you to under­stand them, and when you learn them when you get a little bit older you might be able to think up some better rules.” 

Instead of being quite direct with our children. Instead we say "So You are. You are here on probation, and you must understand that. Maybe when you grow up a bit you will be acceptable, but until then you should be seen and not heard. You are a mess and you've got to be educated and schooled and whipped until you are human."

So these attitudes which are inculcated into us from infancy go on into old age. The way you start out is liable to be the way you finish. So people are going around fundamentally feeling that they do not belong because their parents said to them in the first place, “Look, you don’t really belong here, you are here on sufferance. You are on probation. You are not a human being yet.” And people feel this right on into old age and so they figure that the universe is presided over by this kind of awful God-the-Father parent who, yes, has our best interest at heart, he’s loving, but “Who spares the rod, spoils the child. Whom the Lord loveth, He chasteneth.” 

So, where is it going to hit next? So don't feel that they belong, and so they get this ghastly, what I call, “Christian ego,” and a little bit Jewish too, who really feels that he is homeless, that he is orphan.

Even the Christians say we are sons of God by adop­tion and grace, not real sons but only by adoption, grace, and suf­ferance. And so comes a sensation so characteristic of Western man and, indeed, of all highly civilized people of being a stranger on the earth. A momentary flash of consciousness between two eternal blacknesses and therefore in constant contensiousness with everything around you, not only with the people, but with the earth and the waters. And the symbol of it all in our culture is the bulldozer.

Where I live, aboard a ferry boat, there is opposite us accross the water, or was opposite to us, some lovely hills. They are going to put houses there, but they are going to try and put the sort of houses you would find in a suburban tract lot on a hill of all things, because a good architect can make a house fit the hill. He doesn't have to destroy the hill to put a house on it. And if you want to live on a hill, obviously you want to live on a hill. And you don't want to destroy the hill by virtue of living on it. But that's what they do, especially in California. Texas is kind of flat and uhh they don't have to do that kind of thing. 

In California, where we've got lots of hills, they always scrape the tops off them until they're perfectly flat. Then they put houses on and then they scrape them off in terraces all the way down. They upset the ecology of the hill and eventually all the houses fall down. And so what? But by that time the payments have been made. 

But that's because the builder doesn't feel that the external world is his own body. It is. The external world is your own body extended. So he, instead of going up to the hill and saying "Good afternoon. I very much want to live here and I would want to like to know what kind of house you would like to have built on you." An intelligent architect always does that. Instead of that, he has a prejudice about what kind of a house is a house. And he has to make the hill submit to this prejudice so he has to ruin the hill and get rid of it, pretty much, and put the house on it. He's absolutely out of his mind. And he's out of his mind because he doesn't realize the external world is his body. When he realizes that, he'll get his mind back.