se to love God, say.

Because if you don’t, there’s gonna be trouble. But it’s up to you. And I have a chance. It’s really a very funny system.

But as a result of that, the most curious things develop into.

Let me just take a little side tracked into legal theory in the United States of America.

How can you as members of a group of the United States, where you believe and you do solemnly swear that you believe this to be the best form of government. When I moved into this country, I had to.

Face the immigration officers and they sat on a important looking desk with Stars and stripes behind them, and they said, what do you think of the former government of the United States? Well, I said, I think it’s a very good form of government. [laughs] OK, so but when you actually become a citizen.

That was a later process. You renounce all other allegiances and you do solemnly swear. Cross your heart and hope to die. That the American flag represents the ideal form of government. And it’s a republic.

How, then, can you believe that the universe is a monarchy? You just can’t do that. One nation under God is an absolute contradiction. Because then when you say it’s under God, it’s not a republic anymore, it’s a monarchy.

So now what happens? You were. Our young man and you are called to the colors to fight.

And you find it against your conscience to do so.

You don’t believe in killing people.

What do you have to do? Well, this has been modified recently, but what you always had to do was to appeal over the head of the nation and the president to a superior authority, called the supreme being. They didn’t actually say God because they wanted to allow that. Not only Christians, but maybe some Mohammedans and people like that also might do this, and a few rationalists who believed in a supreme being like Woostya [sic].

But you had to, in other words, to accept the military view of the world that there’s a chain of command going down from the highest bus and you say to the commander in chief of the United States since President Johnson. I have word from a higher authority than you personally conveyed to me that I am not to fight in this war or any war.

And they have to say it because of freedom of religion. And it’s always complicated game. OK. You’re accepted. You don’t have to fight because you’ve appealed to a higher court.

So therefore, a Buddhist or a Dallas finds himself in a very funny position because he doesn’t like this word supreme being. Because he doesn’t view the universe as a military operation with a commander in chief or a monarch at the top. He looks at it as an organism in which all of us are, as it were, the arms of God, like the legs on a centipede. So there isn’t a chain of command. It doesn’t work that way.

Well, the courts have recently more or less decided the word supreme being can be taken extremely vaguely. Like the famous story of the House of Commons when they were debating in 1928 on the revision of the prayer book for the Church of England, somebody got up and said, it seems ridiculous that this house, which contains a number of atheists, should be debating on the whether the Church of England should have a new prayer book or not.

Somebody got up and said, Oh, I don’t think there are rarely any atheists [here]. We all believe in some sort of something somewhere.

There it is. Now, so the political theory of the universe as a monarchy, as a patriarchy simply does not make sense to people anymore.

It’s worn out, the view of the cosmos delivered to us by modern astronomy and modern physics.

It is so magnificent and so. Stones the mind.

That’s the real meaning. To be astounded.

A stone in everybody’s gonna get stones that it it just doesn’t jibe anymore.

We’ve seen it’s like style in works of art. You very well know when you listen to Shostakovich that it wasn’t written by Bach.

And when you look at the universe as revealed to us through modern science, you know, it wasn’t written by Jehovah.

It’s too big, it’s too amazing.

And some people just abandon everything and say, well. For heaven sakes, let’s let’s let’s keep control of this thing. Let’s not get stoned. Let’s say it was just a mechanism. See, it’s stupid. It’s just that just the thing going on, not going on like Newton’s village games.

And that’s simply self-defense. Against allowing your reason to be bulled over, by amazement at the nature of the world, of reality, of yourself, of your organism, of your brain, your nervous system, everything and control around here.

Oh, yes, we all understand what’s going on. It’s just nerves, just protoplasm, molecules, stuff.

We understand at all. This is a you know, this is a defense mechanism. So that doesn’t work.

That doesn’t appeal to anyone today. Monarchical theory of the world doesn’t appeal to anyone today. I mean, it’s it’s it’s fizzling. There are still a few people who dig it, but it’s on its way out.

So what’s gonna take its place? We see this fantastic growth of interest, therefore, in experiential as distinct from dogmatic religion. Now, I may have a slightly prejudiced position in this because I’ve been involved for years and years in trying to explain Oriental philosophy and religion to Western people, and therefore, naturally, it would have pleased me to think that all kinds of people were interested in this. But what I have today is a very odd feeling that I’m slightly alarmed that what I said has been taken so literally by young people.

And suddenly they really say you meant that. Yeah. You know, they’re coming on and though, hey, wait a minute, wait a minute, wait a minute. You say. Don’t take me too seriously.

But this is always the case.

When the older generation has taught the younger generation this, that and the other and the younger generation says, yeah. The older generation is now. Now, wait a minute.

We are not quite such good authorities, as you may have thought, because you see the amazing vitality with which a change comes to pass and you think, well, maybe it is immature and will overstep itself and is being a little bit unwise in this way and that way, it was ever thus.

Young people were always immoderate. You know, hurray!

Otherwise, they wouldn’t be young.

So, what I think. The death of God, movement in the existing churches, is something like this.

The individual clergy have at last got to be honest.

They can’t go on going through the motions and preaching a religion that they themselves don’t believe in. But they’ve got to make a jump. It’s not enough to say God is dead, and therefore life is nothing more than a trip from the maternity ward to the crematorium. And how in that interim, shall we apply some semblance of Christian principles? That’s what many of them are trying to wrestle with, what we call secularized Christianity or religion-less Christianity. To use the phrase of vote man and a bunch of money. Both man calls it the D mythologized Bible. I have tried to have this out the some of the important figures in this movement and notably the bishop of Woolwich.

And Hamilton and Alltisza [sic[

And there is a chance. Pike to. It isn’t that.

We’re saying, there is nothing at all that transcends. What we call common or garden reality.

As a matter of fact, what we call everyday reality is pretty much a myth.

Psychiatrist believe in it and in that effect have a sort of vested interest in maintaining that everyday life is dull.

That it’s just a matter of like a hospital where you’ve got scrubbed white tiles and bottles that clank and so on. And that’s that’s reality. You see, hard floorsMonday morning, rather depressing. Get on with your work.

That’s supposed to be the real world. Face it.

Well, that’s simply again, that’s a form of the same self-defense against the marvel of the real world.

As you know, the theory [that] it’s nothing but molecules.

It’s all nothing buttery.

Thing is, we don’t know what it is. And we are scared stiff to admit.

We don’t know that we are in the grip of a fantastic miracle and that the biggest miracle in the whole thing is what we call your-self.

That’s the thing you should be scared to death of. You just immediately, because what can it do can frighten itself. It can run up behind itself and shriek ‘boo’, move and jump out of its skin and go through all sorts of things. But fundamentally, what else is that?

It always has to look as if it wasn’t there. All that was out of control or that otherwise would be no fun.

So, what, what would be a very constructive thing to happen is if the death of God. Theology. Would. Ally itself with the ancient tradition of mystical theology which in both India and reasonably early Christianity. Would say every positive idea about God is wrong. See, they in Greek. You have two kinds of theological language. One kind is called cataphatic.

From Cata. Fehmi Fehmi is to speak.

So cata, the particle, means to speak according to, metaphor.

God may be spoken of according to he was like a father, but he is not a father. God is not a cosmic male parent, but we say God the father, because there is a certain analogy between God’s relationship to the world and the father’s relationship to his children. So to speak of God as power, as justice, as kingship, as light, as whatever was catafalque language. Then they said there is apophatic language.

Now Apo is a particle meaning away from. Away from, speaking so apophatic words are eternal.

Which means non-temporal in finite, unlimited, formless modulus, etc., etc. all those negative words are the apathetic language. And so these people held that the apathetic language was the truer language of the two. Even some Thomas Aquinas and nobody reads anymore said in order to speak of God, it is necessary to proceed. By the way of emotion. Because God, by his immensity, exceeds every concept which our mind can form and therefore we speak of God as limitless a tunnel in much the same way that a sculptor reveals an image by knocking stone away.

He doesn’t add anything, he just takes away, and the image is revealed.

So in the same way these mystics of the very ancient Christianity particularly Dionysus

Was actually Shankara. The great writer or nondualist Vedanta interpreter, actually, Shankara and St. Thomas Aquinas are just about contemporaries.

And if they had ever been able to meet, they would have understood each other perfectly. They talk the same language, they reasoned in the same way.

But Shankara went a little further over the precipice.

In. Not feeling the necessity to cling to any fixed conception of the divine. But there you see the point is now is not simply that you are getting rid of an idea.

And doing without as if it were an impoverishment. Getting rid of the idea of God is an enrichment. Because it opens you up to experience the reality instead of the idea.

I call it spiritual window cleaning. You take the image that you’ve painted of the sun off the glass.

And by getting rid of it, the sunlight itself can come into the room.

So by the act of getting rid of all idols, that is to say, intellectual images.

Of God that you cling to and think this makes me feel safe. This makes me able to go on living, etc.. There is nothing.

See. And when there is nothing to cling to.

No way of pinning it all down, pinning the universe down, pinning you down. That I say, well, I really know who I am now. That’s safe. Isn’t any such way.

So that’s that’s why, for example, a person who is neurotic, who is going through a psychotic crisis is actually in a very positive state if the doctors would get around to seeing it that way.

Because there are people who have the jitters because they don’t know who they are.

Anything might happen. How do I know I’m going to be able in the next five minutes to continue the mastery of the English language.

It’s just that I’ve been doing it all these years and I suppose it goes on. But I could very well talk myself into a great worry that I might not be able to do it. Then how would I earn a living? [laughs]

Would you see you never do. No, not really. Oh.

Because you don’t even know how you make a decision. How does your brain enable you to make an act that will, you know.

So the psychotic is the person on the edge suddenly realized how scary it all is.

So what then?

The guru does for a psychotic is saying, instead of you’ve got to be put away.

You’re dangerous, you’re awful, he says. Come on. Come on. Make it. Make it, make it. You’re just just getting warm.

Let go. Stop being frightened of insanity. Chaos plunge into it.

That’s the only way you’ll recover. That’s the act of faith.